---
id: monitoring-glossary
title: Monitoring Glossary
---

Application - A program in which you interact with

Process - The filename that runs when you launch an application. A process can manage multiple services.

Service - A process that runs in the background (you do not directly interact with it). A service can start as soon as the OS is booted and can run even if you are logged off your account. Only one instance of a service can run at one time. A service can manage multiple processes.

APM - monitoring and management of performance and availability of software applications. APM strives to detect and diagnose complex application performance problems to maintain an expected level of service.

Metrics (Time Series Data) - aggregated measurements over time. Examples include throughput over time, average response time over a one minute interval, or CPU utilization of time.

Events - discrete events that happen at a specific moment in time. Examples include a log or error being reported or a configuration change. 
	• Some events are aggregated over time to create metrics (for example: a count of errors over time).

Logs - files that record events that occur in an operating system or software

Traces - a complete picture of a single transaction, down to the database queries and exact invocation patterns. With traces, you get much deeper visibility into a single slow transaction, which can help you understand a broader problem

	• transaction - one logical unit of work in an application. This term primarily refers to server-side transactions monitored

Thread - 

Transaction - one of the system level calls generated by an action that is logged on your system. 

Transaction trace - a stack trace of a transaction.

Apdex_t = the goal time of the transaction. 

* apdex_t "tolerating" = a load time greater than the apdex_t value, but less than 4 times that number (e.x. if the apdex_t is .5, apdex_t "tolerating" is between .51 and 1.99)
* apdex_t "frustrated" = a load time 4x greater than the apdex_t value. 

Key transactions - transactions you have decided are really important, this enables more detailed alerting options.

Telemetry - 

Key Performance Indicator (KPI) - a recurring saved search that returns the value of performance metric, such as CPU load percentage, memory used percentage, response time, and so on.

* Defining KPIs for APIs being used is a critical part of understanding not just how they work but how well they can work and the impact they have on your services. Some KPIs are 'soft' - your documentation, the formal definitions of how the API works, and other are 'hard' - focusing on the underlying functionality of the service being measured.
