---
title: Enterprise Engineering Culture
author: Greg Schullo
---

## What is an Engineering Culture?

What is engineering culture and what does it mean to large enterprises? Engineering culture is a term that is often heard at corporations, but is not specifically defined for those trying to live it. Putting it simply, an engineering culture is a common direction of views and values which drive innovation, planning, designing, architecting, and development behaviors. These behaviors can range from how software is developed, to how documentation is maintained, to how teams handle issues, and how and when work is done.

While it's important to provide a clear vision and sense of direction for the organization, to expect all employees in a single organization to share exactly the same engineering values and practices is unrealistic. This is why engineering culture should be defined to support the unique needs of separate lines of business across a company. As long as we share the common goals of improving the industry in which we work and reducing costs, there's wiggle room in the "how" and it's up to engineers to pave the path and educate others we work with on what works for individual teams.

There are three main categories that drive a positive engineering culture: ownership, accountability, and transparency.

## Three Pillars of Engineering Culture

### Ownership

Ownership is essential to building a strong engineering culture because there needs to be a clearly defined owner or expert for each component of an application. This is important because there are many areas at many large organizations that do not have definite ownership and responsibilities resulting in operational corrections passed off from team to team. Ownership is a team concept. Ownership or expertise does not imply that only an individual is the owner of anything, but rather, a team is responsible for owning their service or application and being the experts in a given area. Having direct ownership of your creations and code helps fill gaps that existed previously.

Ownership forces a culture where there's less of a "that's not my job" mentality. Instead of cold-transferring an incident or ticket over the wall or handing something off, the team becomes directly responsible for the entirety of a service or application, including front end, middle tier, back end, database development, storage, load balancing, and security. There is also much less time wasted with approvals or access issues to different areas of an application.

For example, an application owner at a large organization today may not know what kind of database their application utilizes or how the disaster recovery redundancy is instrumented because "there is a team that handles that for us." Having this total ownership over the entirety of a product drives teams to know their applications better, resulting in better monitoring, reduced time to detection, and quicker recoveries.

Ownership should not impact caring about other aspects of the business, which could include searching for new solutions or potential alternatives to issues or the way things are done currently at the enterprise, both for the owners of a specific service or application and the people taking advice or seeking assistance from owners or experts. It means taking an interest in upstream and downstream dependencies of 'your' system, ensuring a seamless customer experience; which is what ownership is all about.

### Accountability

Being accountable is a direct result of ownership. You and your team own the code and your team is responsible to support it.

Accountability creates more incentive to do things well if the writers of code deal with problems directly. It naturally compels us to focus on details and taking responsibility for all components of your service or application, ultimately resulting in better quality. There is far more incentive to write better code and test more frequently and thoroughly when the owners and creators of code are also responsible for supporting it once it is pushed to a production environment. There is also more drive to create more detailed, accurate, and more frequently updated documentation surrounding how to support a product or service.

Having accountability helps ensure that projects and milestones stay on schedule. When there is more control over the entirety of the service or application, it makes it more possible to meet deadlines by removing obstacles or blockers that may exist in a managed service model. The direction that should be strived for is one where the days of submitting a ticket to another team and waiting for your item to be prioritized in their queue are gone. With a DevOps model and push for engineering culture, you are accountable for the results you get and when you get them.

Accountability encourages collaboration with peers as you own a product with your teammates. Together you are responsible for both the deliverables and success of your product.

### Transparency

Transparency is the foundation of a great engineering culture because knowledge should be shared and encouraged to be leveraged in new and unique ways. A great engineering culture builds upon each others' successes and failures. The reason an engineer puts time and effort into figuring out a new solution or getting a new product working is so others will use it and build on it.

An example of this may be where it takes an engineer a substantial amount of time to install and learn Prometheus and document all the steps to get it working and someone then turns around and is able to implement Prometheus in their own environment for their application in a few short hours. Engineers should be encouraged by that behavior because it means that they were successful! Someone else has now benefitted from the engineer's failures and successes and was able to instrument their own Prometheus service because the documentation and environment was open to view. They are also able to view the code and make modifications to fit their own needs and expand the knowledge base and community further.

The example above touches on the fact that transparency allows for greater potential for contribution. This is one of the staples of an engineering culture and building on work that others have done. The opportunity for contribution is powerful since it's unclear who may contribute and in what ways they may contribute. Ensuring there is opportunity is a must if others are to make an impact.

Being transparent in all areas creates a natural shared consciousness. Getting large groups of people to move in the same direction and act as a more efficient unit is difficult. When everyone has a better idea of the goals of the organization, they are more likely to move that way.

Generally, being honest and transparent will lead to people being confident you are always being mindful to work with the best intentions of the company and the people around you and this results in a natural feeling of assuming positive intent from coworkers and leadership. Being honest and transparent results in building better relationships over time and gives a more clear direction of work to be done. Those better relationships and better understand of work to be done builds trust. One of the best questions you can ask yourself in any situation in the workplace is, "what can I do in this situation to build more trust?" To simply state it, many corporate cultures lack trust. When more trust is built, it results in greater autonomy among persons within the company, but still with the same direction and goals in mind. This autonomy leads to better and faster results.

## More Thoughts on Engineering Culture

### Opensource

The opensource philosophy should be embraced as opensource software is an essential solution to creating a strong engineering culture. The power of opensource is not just the cost benefits they offer from vended solutions, but the transparency it offers, the global community it provides, and its opportunity for contribution from many.

Scalability and cost are big factors in decisions made at large companies. Opensource allows for better scalability because of the lack of licensing agreements or vendor restrictions placed on software and tools. Another way opensource allows for better scalability is the flexibility they provide in distribution of agents or other components that are designed to deliver data or provide other functionalities. A simple example of this could be using a server management solution developed in house to control VM servers using attribute tags to deploy an opensource monitoring solution or different agents or configuration settings to those servers. Imagine automatically pushing out a new monitoring agent version to over 76,000 virtual servers leveraging different technologies and hardware at once.

By using opensource software we are no longer reliant on closed source where trust is placed on a company or vendor who wrote the code. We are free to see the source code and better understand how our own applications function in conjunction with other products. This is important in understanding our application fully and being more accountable for the results of our applications. Ultimately, we need to be responsible for the successes and failures of our applications and using opensource software helps reduce reliance on vendors or external companies. We are not expectant on them to aid us and we eliminate the option to place blame on them when applications are not running as intended. On the flip side of this perspective, while opensource software is often a better option than commercial solutions, that does not mean that it is the end all be all. It should be highlighted that there are times and situations where it makes sense to use vended solutions and we need to use our best judgement when weighing options.

Leveraging and contributing to opensource projects is a selfless endeavor. There is a lot of opportunity for personal development and opensource removes barriers between innovators and allows for more knowledge from employees and fellow engineers to be shared. There is something fulfilling in creating something of value for other developers and employees within an organization or the broader community. By contributing to opensource solutions you are dedicating your time and talents for the benefit of others and the greater good of software development. You are reducing certain innovations or ideas from being locked behind patents, which almost certainly results in hindering progress from just about every direction.

### Focus on Productivity, Not Presence

This is a seemingly unrelated, yet important aspect of an engineering culture. In a world where the line between work and leisure has become much more fine, office presence or screen time should not be scrutinized as heavily as it has been in the past. For many of us in IT, work and personal life mesh pretty closely with laptop computers, email and instant messaging on our smart devices, and an almost instant feed of information at our fingertips. With this in mind, it's important to recognize that freedom to work when and where we are most productive should be encouraged. No one should mind if documentation gets written at 1am or a feature card gets closed on a Saturday or if a developer pushes new code to a development environment at noon on a Tuesday. If work can be done at desireable days and times, productivity, creativity, and employee satisfaction are increased.

The use and acceptance of collaboration tools as an appropriate medium to share information have given us a big leap in efficiency and flexibility to do our work. With tools such as Slack and Github, we are able to be huge contributors to this paradigm shift in when and where work can be completed. In an engineering culture, where we want to promote transparency and collaboration, the use of these types of tools should increase if we want more information to be accessible to more contributors. This is where the real power of these tools is. It's in the subscriber base and the acceptance of their use. By speaking a common language and agreeing to send and retrieve data from these tools as sources, we create a strong community with an organized and simple way to communicate and share thoughts and ideas across every timezone.

An example of another collaboration tool is the popular forum, Stack Overflow. Many of us reference this site multiple times a week to assist in developing solutions or addressing issues that we see during our workday. Think about what makes this tool a valuable resource for many of us... It's not in the UI or that is provides some functionality that other tools do not. As discussed, with tools such as Github and Slack, the value lies in the community and subscriber base that have accepted it as a staple in the development community and what information that community has placed in a single location.

With collaboration tools we are able to increase productivity by increasing collaboration and reduce some of the obstacles that once existed with a traditional brick and mortar office setting. This is not to say that there is not still great value in building relationships, connecting with people in person, and sharing ideas "the old fashioned way." These collaboration tools should just be utilized in addition to building great relationships with coworkers and fellow nerds around the world.

At the end of the day, results are more important than everything else. When, where, and how you accomplish tasks is often irrelevant of the overarching goals. When the outcome is a focus rather than how many hours you sat in your office chair, employee satisfaction increases, which leads to better, more timely, quality results and a more enjoyable culture for everyone.

### A Culture Where Failure is Celebrated

The most important part of creating an engineering culture is creating an environment where failure is seen as a good thing; A culture where creativity can thrive and where we truly celebrate and take positives away when things don't go as planned. In general, freedom and rapid recovery are better than trying to prevent error. If too much error prevention exists it hinders inventive, creative work. This isn't to say not to plan changes and do your due diligence in development and staging environments and celebrating your production application blowing up, but more of an encouragement to try new things and see how they play out.

Aim to fail fast, so if you can try something and show that it does not work the way it originally was thought to or certain solution is not a good fit for a particular use case, than it should be done... because much of the time knowing how not to do something or what not to do adds value in the journey of getting to a better solution or a more correct answer. Failing fast also helps with reduction in premature optimization. Premature optimization is where time is wasted on addressing inefficiencies in the wrong areas or when too much time is spent on something that the organization may never actually use or need. Aiming to fail fast is a mindset that will improve efficiencies in your organization and allow you to focus and spend more time and energy on value adding, customer driven work items.

There are situations where failure is seen as embarrassing. An example of this may be where an application team sets up raw error rate monitoring for the first time and discover their raw error rate is over 50 percent. Rather than share that information openly, the app team chooses to keep it to themselves out of fear of exposure or further embarrassment. This should not be the case. It's true an over 50 percent raw error rate is not something to be desired, but it should be a great indication that there is opportunity for improvement and growth to both the application itself and those supporting the application. The goal is not to be perfect, but to be better than yesterday.

We need to empower employees and coworkers. We need to work to remove roadblocks and processes that prevent doers from doing. There is a lot of talent within organizations and the globally development community. We need to encourage those talented people and remind them they have permission to go out and make things happen. Along with having permission to make things happen, it is important to be reminded that we have permission to fail as well and actually encourage it. As long as efforts are being made to better yourself and your cause and your experiences are documented, the results of your efforts should be appreciated and seen as valuable contributions to the enterprise.

In short, failures are the most powerful way in which people learn. By not systematically and culturally taking inevitable failures as a positive, learning, and growing experience, both individuals and the corporation are stunted and failures remain as problems long term.

## Conclusion

A strong engineering culture is an attitude and mindset much more than it is a tool, job, or individual person. It's a culture with a "can do" attitude of problem solving and organizational self-reliance driven by those in development and operations roles working together.

Creating an engineering culture is an effort that will take time to unfold. We do not have all the answers in what the best ways to move forward are or what the future may hold. But what is known is how enterprises operate in IT is not good enough. Evolving customer demands and expectations require us to adapt to deliver more quality results for less cost at a faster rate than ever before. Challenge all members of an organization to adapt to change and work together to create solutions to meet customer demands and the enterprises' endeavors.
